# Redistricting & House Elections 2012-20: A Structural Analysis

REDMAP, the Republican plan to aggressively gerrymander the states where
they controlled the 2011 redistricting process, is well documented.[^1]
As a result, Republicans enjoyed an almost 20-seat advantage toward
control of the House relative to Democrats after the new maps were drawn
a decade ago. Where the state-by-state vote share suggested Republicans
should have only won 216 seats, they won 234. Even though they garnered
less than half the total votes, they won more than half the seats and
controlled the House---a "wrong winner" anti-majoritarian result.

What is not well understood is that it could have been worse, on the one
hand, and that also it got better, on the other. What follows is a
structural postmortem of redistricting and congressional elections
2012-2020 independent of individual candidates and campaigns.

## Data & Methodology

This analysis uses the concept of unearned seats (UE): the seats a party
wins in excess of the number of whole seats closest to proportional
representation (PR) based on the two-party vote share for a state. By
convention, UE seats favoring Republicans are positive, and UE seats
favoring Democrats are negative (hereafter simply R's and D's). Because
UE seats depend on the two-party vote shares, they decouple this
analysis from changing vote shares.

The election data supporting this analysis is the official data from the
Clerk of the House with results for uncontested races imputed.[^2]

Table 1
(at the end and linked [here](assets/images/Table%201.pdf)) 
shows UE seats for each state over time:

-   Columns I--M show the results for the 2012-2020 elections

-   Columns D--H show the results for the previous decade for comparison

-   Columns N, O, and P show the average UE seats for 2002-10, 2012-16,
    and 2018-20, respectively, and

-   Column Q names the entity that controlled the initial redistricting
    in the 2010 cycle

The states are sorted by their average UE seats for 2012-16, from most R
favoring (+) to most D favoring (--). This highlights four distinct
groups:

-   The first 14 states -- AL, AR, FL, GA, IN, MI, NC, OH, OK, PA, SC,
    TN, TX, and VA -- produced large R-favoring UE seats. Not
    surprisingly, 13 of the 14 maps were drawn by R-controlled
    redistricting processes.

-   The next 16 states -- AK, IA, ID, KS, KY, LA, MO, MS, MT, ND, NE,
    SD, UT, WI, WV, and WY -- yielded smaller R-favoring UE seats, but
    they didn't subsequently change much in 2018-2020. This becomes
    important later in the analysis. These maps were drawn by a mix of
    commissions, courts, split processes, or processes controlled by one
    party or the other.

-   Next, three states yielded proportional state delegations -- CO, NM,
    and NV.

-   Finally, the last 17 states -- AZ, CA, CT, DE, HI, IL, MA, MD, ME,
    MN, NH, NJ, NY, OR, RI, VT, and WA -- produced large UE seats
    favoring D's. Again not surprisingly, these maps tended to be drawn
    by commissions or D-controlled redistricting processes.

Organizing the data this way makes it easier to see the macro dynamics
over time.

## It Could Have Been Worse

During the decade before REDMAP, 2002-2010, R's enjoyed a small average
national net UE seat advantage of 3.2 seats compared to what they should
have won based on the two-party vote share (Table 2). With REDMAP
redistricting, the R advantage in states where they controlled the
redistricting process more than doubled from 18.4 seats to 46.33 seats.
As a result, R's enjoyed a new post-redistricting national advantage
that averaged 21.67 seats. This is REDMAP, in a nutshell.

![Table 2](assets/images/Table%202.png)
*Table 2: R/D Seat Advantage 2010-2020*

That advantage wasn't bigger, because D UE seat in other states
increased -8.47 seats to -24.67 seats at the same time. I wasn't aware
of this, and I did not expect to discover it.

Three factors contributed to this countervailing change:

-   First, D's drew maps to their advantage in two states: IL and MD.
    Where redistricting control was split the previous decade, IL D's
    controlled the 2011 process and drew a map with a solid 2-seat D
    advantage. Similarly, where the previous MD was drawn by a court, MD
    D's controlled the 2011 process and drew map with a solid 7-1 split.
    This map was later challenged in court.

-   Second, even though they were drawn by commissions, the maps in AZ
    and CA favored D's more than in the previous decade. In AZ an
    additional apportioned representative allowed a 4-5 D-R map instead
    of the previous typical 3-5 split.[^3] The CA map was the first
    drawn by a commission and was nonetheless more advantageous to D's
    than the previous map -- unpacking them somewhat -- which yielded
    another 3-4 D seats.[^4]

-   Third, two small-state changes favored D's. One seat DE flipped to
    become a reliable D state, and the typical two-party D vote share in
    2-seat NH increased enough that the second seat was reliably won by
    D's.[^5]

Without these offsetting changes, the R advantage due to REDMAP would
have been roughly 30 seats instead of 20.

## It Got Better

The other dynamic that I wasn't aware of and didn't expect to find was
that the early R advantage due to REDMAP disappeared in 2018 and 2020.
You can this see numerically in Table 2 and visually in Figure 1. For
2018 and 2020, net UE seats averaged just -0.50, i.e., was almost
proportional nationally.

![Figure 1](assets/images/Figure%201.png)
*Figure 1: R/D Seat Advantage 2010-2020*

The average UE seats for the first R group in Table 1 declined an
average of -11.17 seats from the 2012-2016 average to an average of 35.5
seats the 2018-2020, with the bulk of the change (84%) coming from five
states. The first three were states in which R gerrymanders were redrawn
mid-decade:

-   In PA a new map was adopted 02/19/18. This affected the 2018 and
    2020 elections. This contributed an average of -2.83 seats favoring
    D's.

-   In NC the original map was struck down 09/03/19. This affected the
    2020 election and the new map netted D's another seat.

-   In FL the initial map was redrawn 12/02/15. This affected the 2016,
    2018, and 2020 elections. The average change in UE seats was -0.83
    favoring D's.

In addition, while the plans didn't change in MI and VA, how they
performed did. Five competitive districts in these two R-drawn maps
flipped blue:

-   MI -- 8th and 11th

-   VA -- 2nd, 7th, and 10th

To eke out extra R wins, both maps had been drawn with significant R/D
asymmetries that "packed" D's and created some thin-margin
semi-competitive districts that R's would win.[^6] With significantly
greater two-party D vote shares in 2018 and 2020, however, D's were able
to flip them.[^7]

The changes to UE seats in the second R-leaning group, were much
smaller, just 0.33 in aggregate.

At the same time, the aggregate UE seats for the D group increased an
average of -9.83 seats in 2018 and 2020---the blue-leaning states got
bluer. Much of that change (-6.67 seats, 68%) came from competitive
districts flipping blue in the face of increased two-party D vote share
in two states:

-   NJ -- 2nd, 3rd, 7th, and 11th

-   CA -- 10th, 21st, 45th, and 49th

While both plans were drawn by commissions -- NJ's political, CA's
independent -- both also included semi-competitive seats with relatively
thin R margins.[^8] In the face of increased D two-party vote shares in
2018 and 2020, these districts elected D's.

## Conclusion

REDMAP could not have happened to begin with if redistricting maps had
been drawn by independent commissions. It was partially redressed by
courts overturning a few egregious partisan gerrymanders. More
importantly though, a dozen competitive districts in five states acted
as feedback mechanisms that enabled the system to autocorrect to near
national proportionality.

**Appendix: Table 1**

![Table 1](assets/images/Table%201.png)

## Footnotes

[^1]: See *Ratf\*\*cked: The True Story Behind the Secret Plan to Steal
    America\'s Democracy*, Dave Daley (2016).

[^2]: The official results, revised results, the code for imputing
    uncontested races, and a description of it are all in this GitHub
    repository: <https://github.com/alecramsay/ushouse>.

[^3]: AZ got a 9th representative in the apportionment based on the
    2010 census.

[^4]: Declination 8.16 =\> -4.52 degrees; average R win 56.02% =\>
    57.20%; average D win 69.90% =\> 68.90%. Map http://bit.ly/3W7e9vl
    =\> http://bit.ly/3ILtwGI.

[^5]: Average two-party D vote share 46.7% =\> 53.0%.

[^6]: MI declination: 22.01 degrees; average R win: 55.84%; average D
    win: 68.75% (map: http://bit.ly/3vZqmHR). VA declination: 10.33
    degrees; average R win: 57.70%; average D win: 64.20% (map:
    http://bit.ly/3CLW7YV).

[^7]: These districts are in the competitive region of the rank-votes
    graphs, http://bit.ly/3XpYHeP and http://bit.ly/3X5y4vT,
    respectively.

[^8]: NJ (map: http://bit.ly/3XrN86T), CA (map:
    https://davesredistricting.org/join/09a02b57-93e8-4d59-8a04-bd7d65edf820).
